<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CLVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>34 Navajivan and Young India</h3>
			<p>Thus, whilst this movement for the preservation of non-violence was making steady though slow progress on the one hand, Government’s policy of lawless repression was in full career on the other, and was manifesting itself in the Punjab in all its nakedness. Leaders were put under arrest, martial law, which in other words meant no law, was proclaimed, special tribunals were set up. These tribunals were not courts of justice but instruments for carrying out the arbitrary will of an autocrat. Sentences were passed unwarranted by evidence and in flagrant violation of justice. In Amritsar innocent men and women were made to crawl like worms on their bellies. Before this outrage the Jallianwala Bagh tragedy paled into insignificance in my eyes, though it was this massacre principally that attracted the attention of the people of India and the world.</p>
			<p>I was pressed to proceed to the Punjab immediately in disregard of consequences. I wrote and also telegraphed to the Viceroy asking for permission to go there, but in vain. If I proceeded without the necessary permission, I should not be allowed to cross the boundary of the Punjab, but left to find what satisfaction I could from civil disobedience. I was thus confronted by a serious dilemma. As things stood, to break the order against my entry into the Punjab could, it seemed to me, hardly be classed as civil disobedience, for I did not see around me the kind of peaceful atmosphere that I wanted, and the unbridled repression in the Punjab had further served to aggravate and deepen the feelings of resentment. For me, therefore, to offer civil disobedience at such a time, even if it were possible, would have been like fanning the flame. I therefore decided not to proceed to the Punjab in spite of the suggestion of friends. It was a bitter pill for me to swallow. Tales of rank injustice and oppression came pouring in daily from the Punjab, but all I could do was to sit helplessly by and gnash my teeth.</p>
			<p>Just then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horniman, in whose hands the <i>Bombay Chronicle</i> had become a formidable force, was suddenly spirited away by the authorities. This act of the Government seemed to me to be surrounded by a foulness which still stinks in my nostrils. I know that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Horniman never desired lawlessness. He had not liked my breaking the prohibitory order of the Punjab Government without the permission of the Satyagraha Committee, and had fully endorsed the decision to suspend civil disobedience. I had even received from him a letter advising suspension before I had announced my decision to that effect. Only owing to the distance between Bombay and Ahmedabad I got the letter after the announcement. His sudden deportation therefore caused me as much pain as surprise.</p>
			<p>As a result of these developments I was asked by the directors of the <i>Bombay Chronicle</i> to take up the responsibility of conducting that paper. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brelvi was already there on the staff, so not much remained to be done by me, but as usual with my nature, the responsibility would have become an additional tax.</p>
			<p>But the Government came as it were to my rescue, for by its order the publication of the <i>Chronicle</i> had to be suspended.</p>
			<p>The friends who were directing the management of the <i>Chronicle</i>, <abbr>viz.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Umar Sobani and Shankarlal Banker, were at this time also controlling <i>Young India</i>. They suggested that, in view of the suppression of the <i>Chronicle</i>, I should now take up the editorship of <i>Young India</i> and that, in order to fill the gap left by the former, <i>Young India</i> should be converted from a weekly into a biweekly organ. This was what I felt also. I was anxious to expound the inner meaning of Satyagraha to the public, and also hoped that through this effort I should at least be able to do justice to the Punjab situation. For, behind all I wrote, there was potential Satyagraha, and the Government knew as much. I therefore readily accepted the suggestion made by these friends.</p>
			<p>But how could the general public be trained in Satyagraha through the medium of English? My principal field of work lay in Gujarat. Sjt. Indulal Yajnik was at that time associated with the group of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Sobani and Banker. He was conducting the Gujarati monthly <i>Navajivan</i> which had the financial backing of these friends. They placed the monthly at my disposal, and further Sjt Indulal offered to work on it. This monthly was converted into a weekly.</p>
			<p>In the meantime the <i>Chronicle</i> was resuscitated. <i>Young India</i> was therefore restored to its original weekly form. To have published the two weeklies from two different places would have been very inconvenient to me and involved more expenditure. As <i>Navajivan</i> was already being published from Ahmedabad <i>Young India</i> was also removed there at my suggestion.</p>
			<p>There were other reasons besides for this change. I had already learnt from my experience of <i>Indian Opinion</i> that such journals needed a press of their own. Moreover the press laws in force in India at that time were such that, if I wanted to express my views untrammelled, the existing printing presses, which were naturally run for business, would have hesitated to publish them. The need for setting up a press of our own, therefore, became all the more imperative, and since this could be conveniently done only at Ahmedabad, <i>Young India</i> too had to be taken there.</p>
			<p>Through these journals I now commenced to the best of my ability the work of educating the reading public in Satyagraha. Both of them had reached a very wide circulation, which at one time rose to the neighbourhood of forty thousand each. But while the circulation of <i>Navajivan</i> went up at a bound, that of <i>Young India</i> increased only by slow degrees. After my incarceration the circulation of both these journals fell to a low ebb, and today stands below eight thousand.</p>
			<p>From the very start I set my face against taking advertisements in these journals. I do not think that they have lost anything thereby. On the contrary, it is my belief that it has in no small measure helped them to maintain their independence.</p>
			<p>Incidentally these journals helped me also to some extent to remain at peace with myself for, whilst immediate resort to civil disobedience was out of the question, they enabled me freely to ventilate my views and to put heart into the people. Thus I feel that both the journals rendered good service to the people in this hour of trial, and did their humble bit towards lightening the tyranny of the martial law.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
