<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XL</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Religious Ferment</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It is now time to turn again to my experiences with Christian friends.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Baker was getting anxious about my future. He took me to the Wellington Convention. The Protestant Christians organize such gatherings every few years for religious enlightenment or, in other words, self-purification. One may call this religious restoration or revival. The Wellington Convention was of this type. The chairman was the famous divine of the place, the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Andrew Murray. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Baker had hoped that the atmosphere of religious exaltation at the Convention, and the enthusiasm and earnestness of the people attending it, would inevitably lead me to embrace Christianity.</p>
			<p>But his final hope was the efficacy of prayer. He had an abiding faith in prayer. It was his firm conviction that God could not but listen to prayer fervently offered. He would cite the instances of men like George Muller of Bristol, who depended entirely on prayer even for his temporal needs. I listened to his discourse on the efficacy of prayer with unbiased attention, and assured him that nothing could prevent me from embracing Christianity, should I feel the call. I had no hesitation in giving him this assurance, as I had long since taught myself to follow the inner voice. I delighted in submitting to it. To act against it would be difficult and painful to me.</p>
			<p>So we went to Wellington. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Baker was hard put to it in having “a coloured man” like me for his companion. He had to suffer inconveniences on many occasions entirely on account of me. We had to break the journey on the way, as one of the days happened to be a Sunday, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Baker and his party would not travel on the sabbath. Though the manager of the station hotel agreed to take me in after much altercation, he absolutely refused to admit me to the dining-room. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Baker was not the man to give way easily. He stood by the rights of the guests of a hotel. But I could see his difficulty. At Wellington also I stayed with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Baker. In spite of his best efforts to conceal the little inconveniences that he was put to, I could see them all.</p>
			<p>This Convention was an assemblage of devout Christians. I was delighted at their faith. I met the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Murray. I saw that many were praying for me. I liked some of their hymns, they were very sweet.</p>
			<p>The Convention lasted for three days. I could understand and appreciate the devoutness of those who attended it. But I saw no reason for changing my belief⁠—my religion. It was impossible for me to believe that I could go to heaven or attain salvation only by becoming a Christian. When I frankly said so to some of the good Christian friends, they were shocked. But there was no help for it.</p>
			<p>My difficulties lay deeper. It was more than I could believe that Jesus was the only incarnate son of God, and that only he who believed in him would have everlasting life. If God could have sons, all of us were His sons. If Jesus was like God, or God Himself, then all men were like God and could be God Himself. My reason was not ready to believe literally that Jesus by his death and by his blood redeemed the sins of the world. Metaphorically there might be some truth in it. Again, according to Christianity only human beings had souls, and not other living beings, for whom death meant complete extinction; while I held a contrary belief. I could accept Jesus as a martyr, an embodiment of sacrifice, and a divine teacher, but not as the most perfect man ever born. His death on the Cross was a great example to the world, but that there was anything like a mysterious or miraculous virtue in it my heart could not accept. The pious lives of Christians did not give me anything that the lives of men of other faiths had failed to give. I had seen in other lives just the same reformation that I had heard of among Christians. Philosophically there was nothing extraordinary in Christian principles. From the point of view of sacrifice, it seemed to me that the Hindus greatly surpassed the Christians. It was impossible for me to regard Christianity as a perfect religion or the greatest of all religions.</p>
			<p>I shared this mental churning with my Christian friends whenever there was an opportunity, but their answers could not satisfy me.</p>
			<p>Thus if I could not accept Christianity either as a perfect, or the greatest religion, neither was I then convinced of Hinduism being such. Hindu defects were pressingly visible to me. If untouchability could be a part of Hinduism, it could but be a rotten part or an excrescence. I could not understand the raison d’être of a multitude of sects and castes. What was the meaning of saying that the Vedas were the inspired Word of God? If they were inspired, why not also the Bible and the Koran?</p>
			<p>As Christian friends were endeavouring to convert me, even so were Musalman friends. Abdulla Sheth had kept on inducing me to study Islam, and of course he had always something to say regarding its beauty.</p>
			<p>I expressed my difficulties in a letter to Raychandbhai. I also corresponded with other religious authorities in India and received answers from them. Raychandbhai’s letter somewhat pacified me. He asked me to be patient and to study Hinduism more deeply. One of his sentences was to this effect: “On a dispassionate view of the question I am convinced that no other religion has the subtle and profound thought of Hinduism, its vision of the soul, or its charity.”</p>
			<p>I purchased Sale’s translation of the Koran and began reading it. I also obtained other books on Islam. I communicated with Christian friends in England. One of them introduced me to Edward Maitland, with whom I opened correspondence. He sent me <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Perfect Way</i>, a book he had written in collaboration with Anna Kingsford. The book was a repudiation of the current Christian belief. He also sent me another book, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The New Interpretation of the Bible</i>. I liked both. They seemed to support Hinduism. Tolstoy’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kingdom of God Is Within You</i> overwhelmed me. It left an abiding impression on me. Before the independent thinking, profound morality, and the truthfulness of this book, all the books given me by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Coates seemed to pale into insignificance.</p>
			<p>My studies thus carried me in a direction unthought of by the Christian friends. My correspondence with Edward Maitland was fairly prolonged, and that with Raychandbhai continued until his death. I read some of the books he sent me. These included <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="sa-Latn">Panchikaran</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="sa-Latn">Maniratnamala</i>, “<i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Mumukshu Prakaran</i>” of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="sa-Latn">Yogavasishtha</i>, Haribhadra Suri’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="sa-Latn">Shaddarshana Samuchchaya</i> and others.</p>
			<p>Though I took a path my Christian friends had not intended for me, I have remained forever indebted to them for the religious quest that they awakened in me. I shall always cherish the memory of their contact. The years that followed had more, not less, of such sweet and sacred contacts in store for me.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
