<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII: That Memorable Week!—II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">That Memorable Week!⁠—<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>So I went to the Commissioner <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Griffith’s office. All about the staircase leading to the office I saw soldiers armed from top to toe, as though for military action. The verandah was all astir. When I was admitted to the office, I saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bowring sitting with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Griffith.</p>
			<p>I described to the Commissioner the scenes I had witnessed. He replied briefly: “I did not want the procession to proceed to the Fort as a disturbance was inevitable there. And as I saw that the people would not listen to persuasion, I could not help ordering the mounted police to charge through the crowd.”</p>
			<p>“But,” said I, “you knew what the consequences must be. The horses were bound to trample on the people. I think it was quite unnecessary to send that contingent of mounted men.”</p>
			<p>“You cannot judge that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Griffith. “We police officers know better than you the effect of your teaching on the people. If we did not start with drastic measures, the situation would pass out of our hands. I tell you that the people are sure to go out of your control. Disobedience of law will quickly appeal to them; it is beyond them to understand the duty of keeping peaceful. I have no doubt about your intentions, but the people will not understand them. They will follow their natural instinct.”</p>
			<p>“It is there that I join issue with you,” I replied. “The people are not by nature violent but peaceful.”</p>
			<p>And thus we argued at length. Ultimately <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Griffith said, “But suppose you were convinced that your teaching had been lost on the people, what would you do?”</p>
			<p>“I should suspend civil disobedience if I were so convinced.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean? You told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bowring that you would proceed to the Punjab the moment you were released.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I wanted to do so by the next available train. But it is out of the question today.”</p>
			<p>“If you will be patient, the conviction is sure to grow on you. Do you know what is happening in Ahmedabad? And what has happened in Amritsar? People have everywhere gone nearly mad. I am not yet in possession of all the facts. The telegraph wires have been cut in some places. I put it to you that the responsibility for all these disturbances lies on you.”</p>
			<p>“I assure you I should readily take it upon myself wherever I discovered it. But I should be deeply pained and surprised, if I found that there were disturbances in Ahmedabad. I cannot answer for Amritsar. I have never been there, no one knows me there. But even about the Punjab I am certain of this much that, had not the Punjab Government prevented my entry into the Punjab, I should have been considerably helpful in keeping the peace there. By preventing me they gave the people unnecessary provocation.”</p>
			<p>And so we argued on and on. It was impossible for us to agree. I told him that I intended to address a meeting on Chaupati and to ask the people to keep the peace, and took leave of him. The meeting was held on the Chaupati sands. I spoke at length on the duty of nonviolence and on the limitations of satyagraha, and said: “Satyagraha is essentially a weapon of the truthful. A satyagrahi is pledged to nonviolence, and, unless people observe it in thought, word and deed, I cannot offer mass satyagraha.”</p>
			<p>Anasuyabehn, too, had received news of disturbances in Ahmedabad. Someone had spread a rumour that she also had been arrested. The mill-hands had gone mad over her rumoured arrest, struck work and committed acts of violence, and a sergeant had been done to death.</p>
			<p>I proceeded to Ahmedabad. I learnt that an attempt had been made to pull up the rails near the Nadiad railway station, that a Government officer had been murdered in Viramgam, and that Ahmedabad was under martial law. The people were terror-stricken. They had indulged in acts of violence and were being made to pay for them with interest.</p>
			<p>A police officer was waiting at the station to escort me to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pratt, the Commissioner. I found him in a state of rage. I spoke to him gently, and expressed my regret for the disturbances⁠—I suggested that martial law was unnecessary, and declared my readiness to cooperate in all efforts to restore peace. I asked for permission to hold a public meeting on the grounds of the Sabarmati Ashram. The proposal appealed to him, and the meeting was held, I think, on Sunday, the 13th of April, and martial law was withdrawn the same day or the day after. Addressing the meeting, I tried to bring home to the people the sense of their wrong, declared a penitential fast of three days for myself, appealed to the people to go on a similar fast for a day, and suggested to those who had been guilty of acts of violence to confess their guilt.</p>
			<p>I saw my duty as clear as daylight. It was unbearable for me to find that the labourers, amongst whom I had spent a good deal of my time, whom I had served, and from whom I had expected better things, had taken part in the riots, and I felt I was a sharer in their guilt.</p>
			<p>Just as I suggested to the people to confess their guilt, I suggested to the Government to condone the crimes. Neither accepted my suggestion.</p>
			<p>The late Sir Ramanbhai and other citizens of Ahmedabad came to me with an appeal to suspend satyagraha. The appeal was needless, for I had already made up my mind to suspend satyagraha so long as people had not learnt the lesson of peace. The friends went away happy.</p>
			<p>There were, however, others who were unhappy over the decision. They felt that, if I expected peace everywhere and regarded it as a condition precedent to launching satyagraha, mass satyagraha would be an impossibility. I was sorry to disagree with them. If those amongst whom I worked, and whom I expected to be prepared for nonviolence and self-suffering, could not be nonviolent, satyagraha was certainly impossible. I was firmly of opinion that those who wanted to lead the people to satyagraha ought to be able to keep the people within the limited nonviolence expected of them. I hold the same opinion even today.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
