<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-4-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>43 Homeward</h3>
			<p>Mr Kallenbach had accompanied me to England with a view to going to India. We were staying together and of course wanted to sail by the same boat. Germans, however, were under such strict surveillance that we had our doubts about Mr Kallenbach getting a passport. I did my best to get it, and Mr Roberts, who was in favour of his getting his passport, sent a cable to the Viceroy on his behalf. But straight came Lord Hardinge’s reply: ‘Regret Government of India not prepared to take any such risk.’ All of us understood the force of the reply.</p>
			<p>It was a great wrench for me to part from Mr Kallenbach, but I could see that his pang was greater. Could he have come to India, he would have been leading today the simple happy life of a farmer and weaver. Now he is in South Africa, leading his old life and doing brisk business as an architect.</p>
			<p>We wanted a third class passage, but as there was none available on P. and O. boats, we had to go second.</p>
			<p>We took with us the dried fruit we had carried from South Africa, as most of it would not be procurable on the boat where fresh fruit was easily available.</p>
			<p>Dr Jivraj Mehta had bandaged my ribs with ‘Mede’s Plaster’, and had asked me not to remove it till we reached the Red Sea. For two days I put up with the discomfort, but finally it became too much for me. It was with considerable difficulty that I managed to undo the plaster and regain the liberty of having a proper wash and bath.</p>
			<p>My diet consisted mostly of nuts and fruits. I found that I was improving every day and felt very much better by the time we entered the Suez Canal. I was weak, but felt entirely out of danger, and I gradually went on increasing my exercise. The improvement I attributed largely to the pure air of the temperate zone.</p>
			<p>Whether it was due to past experience or to any other reason, I do not know, but the kind of distance I noticed between the English and Indian passengers on the boat was something I had not observed even on my voyage from South Africa. I did talk to a few Englishmen, but the talk was mostly formal. There were hardly any cordial conversations such as had certainly taken place on the South African boats. The reason for this was, I think, to be found in the conscious or unconscious feeling at the back of the Englishman’s mind that he belonged to the ruling race, and the feeling at the back of the Indian’s mind that he belonged to the subject race.</p>
			<p>I was eager to reach home and get free from this atmosphere.</p>
			<p>On arriving at Aden we already began to feel somewhat at home. We knew the Adenwalas very well, having met Mr Kekobad Kavasji Dinshaw in Durban and come in close contact with him and his wife.</p>
			<p>A few days more and we reached Bombay. It was such a joy to get back to the homeland after an exile of ten years.</p>
			<p>Gokhale had inspired a reception for me in Bombay, where he had come in spite of his delicate health. I had approached India in the ardent hope of merging myself in him, and thereby feeling free. But fate had willed it otherwise.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
