<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXLIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>20 In Touch with Labour</h3>
			<p>Whilst I was yet winding up my work on the Committee, I received a letter from Sjt Mohanlal Pandya and Shankarlal Parikh telling me of the failure of crops in the Kheda district, and asking me to guide the peasants, who were unable to pay the assessment. I had not the inclination, the ability or the courage to advise without an inquiry on the spot.</p>
			<p>At the same time there came a letter from Shrimati Anasuyabai about the condition of labour in Ahmedabad. Wages were low, the labourers had long been agitating for an increment, and I had a desire to guide them if I could. But I had not the confidence to direct even this comparatively small affair from that long distance. So I seized the first opportunity to go to Ahmedabad. I had hoped that I should be able to finish both these matters quickly and get back to Champaran to supervise the constructive work that had been inaugurated there.</p>
			<p>But things did not move as swiftly as I had wished, and I was unable to return to Champaran, with the result that the schools closed down one by one. My co-workers and I had built many castles in the air, but they all vanished for the time being.</p>
			<p>One of these was cow protection work in Champaran, besides rural sanitation and education. I had seen, in the course of my travels, that cow protection and Hindi propaganda had become the exclusive concern of the Marwadis. A Marwadi friend had sheltered me in his <i>dharmashala</i> whilst at Bettiah. Other Marwadis of the place had interested me in their <i>goshala</i> (dairy). My ideas about cow protection had been definitely formed then, and my conception of the work was the same as it is today. Cow protection, in my opinion, included cattle-breeding, improvement of the stock, humane treatment of bullocks, formation of model dairies, etc. The Marwadi friends had promised full co-operation in this work, but as I could not fix myself up in Champaran, the scheme could not be carried out.</p>
			<p>The <i>goshala</i> in Bettiah is still there, but it has not become a model dairy, the Champaran bullock is still made to work beyond his capacity, and the so-called Hindu still cruelly belabours the poor animal and disgraces his religion.</p>
			<p>That this work should have remained unrealized has been, to me, a continual regret, and whenever I go to Champaran and hear the gentle reproaches of the Marwadi and Bihari friends, I recall with a heavy sigh all those plans which I had to drop so abruptly.</p>
			<p>The educational work in one way or another is going on in many places. But the cow protection work had not taken firm root, and has not, therefore, progressed in the direction intended.</p>
			<p>Whilst the Kheda peasants’ question was still being discussed, I had already taken up the question of the mill-hands in Ahmedabad.</p>
			<p>I was in a most delicate situation. The mill-hands’ case was strong. Shrimati Anasuyabai had to battle against her own brother, Sjt Ambalal Sarabhai, who led the fray on behalf of the mill-owners. My relations with them were friendly, and that made fighting with them the more difficult. I had consultations with them, and requested them to refer the dispute to arbitration, but they refused to recognize the principle of arbitration.</p>
			<p>I had therefore to advise the labourers to go on strike. Before I did so, I came in very close contact with them and their leaders, and explained to them the conditions of a successful strike:</p>
			<p>1. never to resort to violence,</p>
			<p>2. never to molest blacklegs,</p>
			<p>3. never to depend upon alms, and</p>
			<p>4. to remain firm, no matter how long the strike continued, and to earn bread, during the strike, by any other honest labour.</p>
			<p>The leaders of the strike understood and accepted the conditions, and the labourers pledged themselves at a general meeting not to resume work until either their terms were accepted or the mill-owners agreed to refer the dispute to arbitration.</p>
			<p>It was during this strike that I came to know intimately Sjts Vallabhbhai Patel and Shankarlal Banker. Shrimati Anasuyabai I knew well before this.</p>
			<p>We had daily meetings of the strikers under the shade of a tree on the bank of the Sabarmati. They attended the meeting in their thousands and I reminded them in my speeches of their pledge and of the duty to maintain peace and self-respect. They daily paraded the streets of the city in peaceful procession, carrying their banner bearing the inscription ‘<i>Ek Tek</i>’ (keep the pledge).</p>
			<p>The strike went on for twenty-one days. During the continuance of the strike I consulted the mill-owners from time to time and entreated them to do justice to the labourers. ‘We have our pledge too,’ they used to say. ‘Our relations with the labourers are those of parents and children … How can we brook the interference of a third party? Where is the room for arbitration?’</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
