<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Glimpses of Religion</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>From my sixth or seventh year up to my sixteenth I was at school, being taught all sorts of things except religion. I may say that I failed to get from the teachers what they could have given me without any effort on their part. And yet I kept on picking up things here and there from my surroundings. The term “religion” I am using in its broadest sense, meaning thereby self-realization or knowledge of self.</p>
			<p>Being born in the Vaishnava faith, I had often to go to the <i xml:lang="gu-Latn">Haveli</i>. But it never appealed to me. I did not like its glitter and pomp. Also I heard rumours of immorality being practised there, and lost all interest in it. Hence I could gain nothing from the <i xml:lang="gu-Latn">Haveli</i>.</p>
			<p>But what I failed to get there I obtained from my nurse, an old servant of the family, whose affection for me I still recall. I have said before that there was in me a fear of ghosts and spirits. Rambha, for that was her name, suggested, as a remedy for this fear, the repetition of <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramanama</i>. I had more faith in her than in her remedy, and so at a tender age I began repeating <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramanama</i> to cure my fear of ghosts and spirits. This was of course, short-lived, but the good seed sown in childhood was not sown in vain. I think it is due to the seed sown by that good woman Rambha that today <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramanama</i> is an infallible remedy for me.</p>
			<p>Just about this time, a cousin of mine who was a devotee of the <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramayana</i> arranged for my second brother and me to learn <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Rama Raksha</i>. We got it by heart, and made it a rule to recite it every morning after the bath. The practice was kept up as long as we were in Porbandar. As soon as we reached Rajkot, it was forgotten. For I had not much belief in it. I recited it partly because of my pride in being able to recite <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Rama Raksha</i> with correct pronunciation.</p>
			<p>What, however, left a deep impression on me was the reading of the <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramayana</i> before my father. During part of his illness my father was in Porbandar. There every evening he used to listen to the <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramayana</i>. The reader was a great devotee of Rama⁠—Ladha Maharaj of Bileshvar. It was said of him that he cured himself of his leprosy not by any medicine, but by applying to the affected parts <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">bilva</i> leaves which had been cast away after being offered to the image of Mahadev in Bileshvar temple, and by the regular repetition of <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramanama</i>. His faith, it was said, had made him whole. This may or may not be true. We at any rate believed the story. And it is a fact that when Ladha Maharaj began his reading of the <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramayana</i> his body was entirely free from leprosy. He had a melodious voice. He would sing the <i xml:lang="hi-Latn">Dohas</i> (couplets) and <i xml:lang="hi-Latn">Chopais</i> (quatrains), and explain them, losing himself in the discourse and carrying his listeners along with him. I must have been thirteen at that time, but I quite remember being enraptured by his reading. That laid the foundation of my deep devotion to the <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramayana</i>. Today I regard the <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramayana</i> of Tulasidas as the greatest book in all devotional literature.</p>
			<p>A few months after this we came to Rajkot. There was no <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ramayana</i> reading there. The <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Bhagavat</i>, however, used to be read on every <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Ekadashi</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> day. Sometimes I attended the reading, but the reciter was uninspiring. Today I see that the <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Bhagavat</i> is a book which can evoke religious fervour. I have read it in Gujarati with intense interest. But when I heard portions of the original read by Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya during my twenty-one days’ fast, I wished I had heard it in my childhood from such a devotee as he is, so that I could have formed a liking for it at an early age. Impressions formed at that age strike roots deep down into one’s nature, and it is my perpetual regret that I was not fortunate enough to hear more good books of this kind read during that period.</p>
			<p>In Rajkot, however, I got an early grounding in toleration for all branches of Hinduism and sister religions. For my father and mother would visit the <i xml:lang="gu-Latn">Haveli</i> as also Shiva’s and Rama’s temples, and would take or send us youngsters there. Jain monks also would pay frequent visits to my father, and would even go out of their way to accept food from us⁠—non-Jains. They would have talks with my father on subjects religious and mundane.</p>
			<p>He had, besides, Musalman and Parsi friends, who would talk to him about their own faiths, and he would listen to them always with respect, and often with interest. Being his nurse, I often had a chance to be present at these talks. These many things combined to inculcate in me a toleration for all faiths.</p>
			<p>Only Christianity was at the time an exception. I developed a sort of dislike for it. And for a reason. In those days Christian missionaries used to stand in a corner near the high school and hold forth, pouring abuse on Hindus and their gods. I could not endure this. I must have stood there to hear them once only, but that was enough to dissuade me from repeating the experiment. About the same time, I heard of a well-known Hindu having been converted to Christianity. It was the talk of the town that, when he was baptized, he had to eat beef and drink liquor, that he also had to change his clothes, and that thenceforth he began to go about in European costume including a hat. These things got on my nerves. Surely, thought I, a religion that compelled one to eat beef, drink liquor, and change one’s own clothes did not deserve the name. I also heard that the new convert had already begun abusing the religion of his ancestors, their customs and their country. All these things created in me a dislike for Christianity.</p>
			<p>But the fact that I had learnt to be tolerant of other religions did not mean that I had any living faith in God. I happened, about this time, to come across <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Manusmriti</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> which was amongst my father’s collection. The story of the creation and similar things in it did not impress me very much, but on the contrary made me incline somewhat towards atheism.</p>
			<p>There was a cousin of mine, still alive, for whose intellect I had great regard. To him I turned with my doubts. But he could not resolve them. He sent me away with this answer: “When you grow up, you will be able to solve these doubts yourself. These questions ought not to be raised at your age.” I was silenced, but was not comforted. Chapters about diet and the like in <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Manusmriti</i> seemed to me to run contrary to daily practice. To my doubts as to this also, I got the same answer. “With intellect more developed and with more reading I shall understand it better,” I said to myself.</p>
			<p><i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Manusmriti</i> at any rate did not then teach me Ahimsa. I have told the story of my meat-eating. <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Manusmriti</i> seemed to support it. I also felt that it was quite moral to kill serpents, bugs and the like. I remember to have killed at that age bugs and such other insects, regarding it as a duty.</p>
			<p>But one thing took deep root in me⁠—the conviction that morality is the basis of things, and that truth is the substance of all morality. Truth became my sole objective. It began to grow in magnitude every day, and my definition of it also has been ever widening.</p>
			<p>A Gujarati didactic stanza likewise gripped my mind and heart. Its precept⁠—return good for evil⁠—became my guiding principle. It became such a passion with me that I began numerous experiments in it. Here are those (for me) wonderful lines:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>For a bowl of water give a goodly meal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a kindly greeting bow thou down with zeal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a simple penny pay thou back with gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thy life be rescued, life do not withhold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the words and actions of the wise regard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every little service tenfold they reward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the truly noble know all men as one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And return with gladness good for evil done.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
