<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLII: Its Rising Tide</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-42" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Its Rising Tide</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>I must not devote any more chapters here to a description of the further progress of Khadi. It would be outside the scope of these chapters to give a history of my various activities after they came before the public eye, and I must not attempt it, if only because to do so would require a treatise on the subject. My object in writing these chapters is simply to describe how certain things, as it were spontaneously, presented themselves to me in the course of my experiments with truth.</p>
			<p>To resume, then, the story of the non-cooperation movement. Whilst the powerful Khilafat agitation set up by the Ali brothers was in full progress, I had long discussions on the subject with the late Maulana Abdul Bari and the other Ulemas, especially, with regard to the extent to which a Musalman could observe the rule of nonviolence. In the end they all agreed that Islam did not forbid its followers from following nonviolence as a policy, and further, that, whilst they were pledged to that policy, they were bound faithfully to carry it out. At last the non-cooperation resolution was moved in the Khilafat conference, and carried after prolonged deliberations. I have a vivid recollection how once at Allahabad a committee sat all night deliberating upon the subject. In the beginning the late Hakim Saheb was sceptical as to the practicability of nonviolent non-cooperation. But after his scepticism was overcome he threw himself into it heart and soul, and his help proved invaluable to the movement.</p>
			<p>Next, the non-cooperation resolution was moved by me at the Gujarat political conference that was held shortly afterwards. The preliminary contention raised by the opposition was that it was not competent to a provincial conference to adopt a resolution in advance of the Congress. As against this, I suggested that the restriction could apply only to a backward movement; but as for going forward the subordinate organizations were not only fully competent, but were in duty bound to do so, if they had in them the necessary grit and confidence. No permission, I argued, was needed to try to enhance the prestige of the parent institution, provided one did it at one’s own risk. The proposition was then discussed on its merits, the debate being marked by its keenness no less than the atmosphere of “sweet reasonableness” in which it was conducted. On the ballot being taken the resolution was declared carried by an overwhelming majority. The successful passage of the resolution was due not a little to the personality of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Vallabhbhai and Abbas Tyabji. The latter was the president, and his leanings were all in favour of the non-cooperation resolution.</p>
			<p>The All-India Congress Committee resolved to hold a special session of the Congress in September 1920 at Calcutta to deliberate on this question. Preparations were made for it on a large scale. Lala Lajpatrai was elected President. Congress and Khilafat specials were run to Calcutta from Bombay. At Calcutta there was a mammoth gathering of delegates and visitors.</p>
			<p>At the request of Maulana Shaukat Ali I prepared a draft of the non-cooperation resolution in the train. Up to this time I had more or less avoided the use of the word nonviolent in my drafts. I invariably made use of this word in my speeches. My vocabulary of the subject was still in process of formation. I found that I could not bring home my meaning to purely Muslim audiences with the help of the Samskrit equivalent for nonviolent. I therefore asked Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to give me some other equivalent for it. He suggested the word <i xml:lang="fa-Latn">ba-aman</i>; similarly for non-cooperation he suggested the phrase <i xml:lang="fa-Latn">tark-i-mavalat</i>.</p>
			<p>Thus, while I was still busy devising suitable Hindi, Gujarati and Urdu phraseology for non-cooperation, I was called upon to frame the non-cooperation resolution for that eventful Congress. In the original draft the word “nonviolent” had been left out by me. I had handed over the draft to Maulana Shaukat Ali who was travelling in the same compartment, without noticing the omission. During the night I discovered the error. In the morning I sent Mahadev with the message that the omission should be made good before the draft was sent to the press. But I have an impression that the draft was printed before the insertion could be made. The Subjects Committee was to have met the same evening. I had therefore to make the necessary correction in the printed copies of the draft. I afterwards saw that there would have been great difficulty, had I not been ready with my draft.</p>
			<p>None the less my plight was pitiable indeed. I was absolutely at sea as to who would support the resolution and who would oppose it. Nor had I any idea as to the attitude that Lalaji would adopt. I only saw an imposing phalanx of veteran warriors assembled for the fray at Calcutta, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Besant, Pandit Malaviyaji, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Vijayaraghavachari, Pandit Motilalji and the Deshabandhu being some of them.</p>
			<p>In my resolution non-cooperation was postulated only with a view to obtaining redress of the Punjab and the Khilafat wrongs. That, however, did not appeal to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Vijayaraghavachari. “If non-cooperation was to be declared, why should it be with reference to particular wrongs? The absence of Swaraj was the biggest wrong that the country was labouring under; it should be against that that non-cooperation should be directed,” he argued. Pandit Motilalji also wanted the demand for Swaraj to be included in the resolution. I readily accepted the suggestion and incorporated the demand for Swaraj in my resolution, which was passed after an exhaustive, serious and somewhat stormy discussion.</p>
			<p>Motilalji was the first to join the movement. I still remember the sweet discussion that I had with him on the resolution. He suggested some changees in its phraseology which I adopted. He undertook to win the Deshabandhu for the movement. The Deshabandhu’s heart was inclined towards it, but he felt sceptical as to the capacity of the people to carry out the programme. It was only at the Nagpur Congress that he and Lalaji accepted it wholeheartedly.</p>
			<p>I felt the loss of the late Lokamanya very deeply at the special session. It has been my firm faith to this day that, had the Lokamanya been then alive, he would have given his benedictions to me on that occasion. But even if it had been otherwise, and he had opposed the movement, I should still have esteemed his opposition as a privilege and an education for myself. We had our differences of opinion always, but they never led to bitterness. He always allowed me to believe that the ties between us were of the closest. Even as I write these lines, the circumstances of his death stand forth vividly before my mind’s eye. It was about the hour of midnight, when Patwardhan, who was then working with me, conveyed over the telephone the news of his death. I was at that time surrounded by my companions. Spontaneously the exclamation escaped my lips, “My strongest bulwark is gone.” The non-cooperation movement was then in full swing, and I was eagerly looking forward to encouragement and inspiration from him. What his attitude would have been with regard to the final phase of non-cooperation will always be a matter of speculation, and an idle one at that. But this much is certain⁠—that the deep void left by his death weighed heavily upon everybody present at Calcutta. Everyone felt the absence of his counsels in that hour of crisis in the nation’s history.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
