<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: Two Passions</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Two Passions</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Hardly ever have I known anybody to cherish such loyalty as I did to the British Constitution. I can see now that my love of truth was at the root of this loyalty. It has never been possible for me to simulate loyalty or, for that matter, any other virtue. The National Anthem used to be sung at every meeting that I attended in Natal. I then felt that I must also join in the singing. Not that I was unaware of the defects in British rule, but I thought that it was on the whole acceptable. In those days I believed that British rule was on the whole beneficial to the ruled.</p>
			<p>The colour prejudice that I saw in South Africa was, I thought, quite contrary to British traditions, and I believed that it was only temporary and local. I therefore vied with Englishmen in loyalty to the throne. With careful perseverance I learnt the tune of the “national anthem” and joined in the singing whenever it was sung. Whenever there was an occasion for the expression of loyalty without fuss or ostentation, I readily took part in it.</p>
			<p>Never in my life did I exploit this loyalty, never did I seek to gain a selfish end by its means. It was for me more in the nature of an obligation, and I rendered it without expecting a reward.</p>
			<p>Preparations were going on for the celebration of Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee when I reached India. I was invited to join the committee appointed for the purpose in Rajkot. I accepted the offer, but had a suspicion that the celebrations would be largely a matter of show. I discovered much humbug about them and was considerably pained. I began to ask myself whether I should remain on the committee or not, but ultimately decided to rest content with doing my part of the business.</p>
			<p>One of the proposals was to plant trees. I saw that many did it merely for show and for pleasing the officials. I tried to plead with them that tree-planting was not compulsory, but merely a suggestion. It should be done seriously or not at all. I have an impression that they laughed at my ideas. I remember that I was in earnest when I planted the tree allotted to me and that I carefully watered and tended it.</p>
			<p>I likewise taught the National Anthem to the children of my family. I recollect having taught it to students of the local Training College, but I forget whether it was on the occasion of the Jubilee or of King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>’s coronation as Emperor of India. Later on the text began to jar on me. As my conception of ahimsa went on maturing, I became more vigilant about my thought and speech. The lines in the Anthem:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Scatter her enemies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make them fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confound their politics,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frustrate their knavish tricks.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">particularly jarred upon my sentiment of ahimsa. I shared my feelings with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Booth who agreed that it ill became a believer in ahimsa to sing those lines. How could we assume that the so-called “enemies” were “knavish”? And because they were enemies, were they bound to be in the wrong? From God we could only ask for justice. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Booth entirely endorsed my sentiments, and composed a new anthem for his congregation. But of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Booth more later.</p>
			<p>Like loyalty an aptitude for nursing was also deeply rooted in my nature. I was fond of nursing people, whether friends or strangers.</p>
			<p>Whilst busy in Rajkot with the pamphlet on South Africa, I had occasion to pay a flying visit to Bombay. It was my intention to educate public opinion in cities on this question by organizing meetings, and Bombay was the first city I chose. First of all I met Justice Ranade, who listened to me with attention, and advised me to meet Sir Pherozeshah Mehta. Justice Badruddin Tyabji, whom I met next, also gave the same advice. “Justice Ranade and I can guide you but little,” he said. “You know our position. We cannot take an active part in public affairs, but our sympathies are with you. The man who can effectively guide you is Sir Pherozeshah Mehta.”</p>
			<p>I certainly wanted to see Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, but the fact that these senior men advised me to act according to his advice gave me a better idea of the immense influence that Sir Pherozeshah had on the public. In due course I met him. I was prepared to be awed by his presence. I had heard of the popular titles that he had earned, and knew that I was to see the “Lion of Bombay,” the “Uncrowned King of the Presidency.” But the king did not overpower me. He met me as a loving father would meet his grown up son. Our meeting took place at his chamber. He was surrounded by a circle of friends and followers. Amongst them were <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. E.</abbr> Wacha and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cama, to whom I was introduced. I had already heard of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wacha. He was regarded as the right-hand man of Sir Pherozeshah, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Virchand Gandhi had described him to me as a great statistician. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wacha said, “Gandhi, we must meet again.”</p>
			<p>These introductions could scarcely have taken two minutes. Sir Pherozeshah carefully listened to me. I told him that I had seen Justices Ranade and Tyabji. “Gandhi,” said he, “I see that I must help you. I must call a public meeting here.” With this he turned to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Munshi, the secretary, and told him to fix up the date of the meeting. The date was settled, and he bade me goodbye, asking me to see him again on the day previous to the meeting. The interview removed my fears, and I went home delighted.</p>
			<p>During this stay in Bombay I called on my brother-in-law, who was staying there and lying ill. He was not a man of means, and my sister (his wife) was not equal to nursing him. The illness was serious, and I offered to take him to Rajkot. He agreed, and so I returned home with my sister and her husband. The illness was much more prolonged than I expected. I put my brother-in-law in my room and remained with him night and day. I was obliged to keep awake part of the night and had to get through some of my South African work whilst I was nursing him. Ultimately, however, the patient died, but it was a great consolation to me that I had had an opportunity to nurse him during his last days.</p>
			<p>My aptitude for nursing gradually developed into a passion, so much so that it often led me to neglect my work, and on occasions I engaged not only my wife but the whole household in such service.</p>
			<p>Such service can have no meaning unless one takes pleasure in it. When it is done for show or for fear of public opinion, it stunts the man and crushes his spirit. Service which is rendered without joy helps neither the servant nor the served. But all other pleasures and possessions pale into nothingness before service which is rendered in a spirit of joy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
