<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV: The Black Plague—I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-4-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Black Plague⁠—<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span></p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The Indians were not removed from the location as soon as the Municipality secured its ownership. It was necessary to find the residents suitable new quarters before dislodging them, but as the Municipality could not easily do this, the Indians were suffered to stay in the same “dirty” location, with this difference that their condition became worse than before. Having ceased to be proprietors they became tenants of the Municipality, with the result that their surroundings became more insanitary than ever. When they were proprietors, they had to maintain some sort of cleanliness, if only for fear of the law. The Municipality had no such fear! The number of tenants increased, and with them the squalor and the disorder.</p>
			<p>While the Indians were fretting over this state of things, there was a sudden outbreak of the black plague also called pneumonic plague, more terrible and fatal than the bubonic.</p>
			<p>Fortunately it was not the location but one of the gold mines in the vicinity of Johannesburg that was responsible for the outbreak. The workers in this mine were for the most part negroes, for whose cleanliness their white employers were solely responsible. There were a few Indians also working in connection with the mine, twenty-three of whom suddenly caught the infection, and returned one evening to their quarters in the location with an acute attack of the plague. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Madanjit, who was then canvassing subscribers for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Indian Opinion</i> and realizing subscriptions, happened to be in the location at this moment. He was a remarkably fearless man. His heart wept to see these victims of the scourge, and he sent a pencil-note to me to the following effect: “There has been a sudden outbreak of the black plague. You must come immediately and take prompt measures, otherwise we must be prepared for dire consequences. Please come immediately.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Madanjit bravely broke open the lock of a vacant house, and put all the patients there. I cycled to the location, and wrote to the Town Clerk to inform him of the circumstances in which we had taken possession of the house.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> William Godfrey, who was practising in Johannesburg, ran to the rescue as soon as he got the news, and became both nurse and doctor to the patients. But twenty-three patients were more than three of us could cope with.</p>
			<p>It is my faith, based on experience, that if one’s heart is pure, calamity brings in its train men and measures to fight it. I had at that time four Indians in my office⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjts.</abbr> Kalyandas, Maneklal, Gunvantrai Desai and another whose name I cannot recollect. Kalyandas had been entrusted to me by his father. In South Africa I have rarely come across anyone more obliging and willing to render implicit obedience than Kalyandas. Fortunately he was unmarried then, and I did not hesitate to impose on him duties involving risks, however great. Maneklal I had secured in Johannesburg. He too, so far as I can remember, was unmarried. So I decided to sacrifice all four⁠—call them clerks, coworkers or sons. There was no need at all to consult Kalyandas. The others expressed their readiness as soon as they were asked. “Where you are, we will also be,” was their short and sweet reply.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ritch had a large family. He was ready to take the plunge, but I prevented him. I had not the heart to expose him to the risk. So he attended to the work outside the danger zone.</p>
			<p>It was a terrible night⁠—that night of vigil and nursing. I had nursed a number of patients before, but never any attacked by the black plague. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Godfrey’s pluck proved infectious. There was not much nursing required. To give them their doses of medicine, to attend to their wants, to keep them and their beds clean and tidy, and to cheer them up was all that we had to do.</p>
			<p>The indefatigable zeal and fearlessness with which the youths worked rejoiced me beyond measure. One could understand the bravery of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Godfrey and of an experienced man like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Madanjit. But the spirit of these callow youths!</p>
			<p>So far as I can recollect, we pulled all the patients through that night.</p>
			<p>But the whole incident, apart from its pathos, is of such absorbing interest and, for me, of such religious value, that I must devote to it at least two more chapters.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
