<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XCVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-4-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Phoenix Settlement</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>I talked over the whole thing with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> West, described to him the effect <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unto This Last</i> had produced on my mind, and proposed that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Indian Opinion</i> should be removed to a farm, on which everyone should labour, drawing the same living wage, and attending to the press work in spare time. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> West approved of the proposal, and £3 was laid down as the monthly allowance per head, irrespective of colour or nationality.</p>
			<p>But it was a question whether all the ten or more workers in the press would agree to go and settle on an out-of-the-way farm, and be satisfied with bare maintenance. We therefore proposed that those who would not fit in with the scheme should continue to draw their salaries and gradually try to reach the ideal of becoming members of the settlement.</p>
			<p>I talked to the workers in the terms of this proposal. It did not appeal to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sjt.</abbr> Madanjit, who considered my proposal to be foolish and held that it would ruin a venture on which he had staked his all; that the workers would bolt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Indian Opinion</i> would come to a stop, and the press would have to be closed down.</p>
			<p>Among the men working in the press was Chhaganlal Gandhi, one of my cousins. I had put the proposal to him at the same time as to West. He had a wife and children, but he had from childhood chosen to be trained and to work under me. He had full faith in me. So without any argument he agreed to the scheme and has been with me ever since. The machinist Govindaswami also fell in with the proposal. The rest did not join the scheme, but agreed to go wherever I removed the press.</p>
			<p>I do not think I took more than two days to fix up these matters with the men. Thereafter I at once advertised for a piece of land situated near a railway station in the vicinity of Durban. An offer came in respect of Phoenix. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> West and I went to inspect the estate. Within a week we purchased twenty acres of land. It had a nice little spring and a few orange and mango trees. Adjoining it was a piece of 80 acres which had many more fruit trees and a dilapidated cottage. We purchased this too, the total cost being a thousand pounds.</p>
			<p>The late <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rustomji always supported me in such enterprises. He liked the project. He placed at my disposal secondhand corrugated iron sheets of a big godown and other building material, with which we started work. Some Indian carpenters and masons, who had worked with me in the Boer War, helped me in erecting a shed for the press. This structure, which was 75 feet long and 50 feet broad, was ready in less than a month. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> West and others, at great personal risk, stayed with the carpenters and masons. The place, uninhabited and thickly overgrown with grass, was infested with snakes and obviously dangerous to live in. At first all lived under canvas. We carted most of our things to Phoenix in about a week. It was fourteen miles from Durban, and two and a half miles from Phoenix station.</p>
			<p>Only one issue of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Indian Opinion</i> had to be printed outside, in the Mercury press.</p>
			<p>I now endeavoured to draw to Phoenix those relations and friends who had come with me from India to try their fortune, and who were engaged in business of various kinds. They had come in search of wealth, and it was therefore difficult to persuade them; but some agreed. Of these I can single out here only Maganlal Gandhi’s name. The others went back to business. Maganlal Gandhi left his business for good to cast in his lot with me, and by ability, sacrifice and devotion stands foremost among my original co-workers in my ethical experiments. As a self-taught handicraftsman his place among them is unique.</p>
			<p>Thus the Phoenix Settlement was started in 1904, and there in spite of numerous odds <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Indian Opinion</i> continues to be published.</p>
			<p>But the initial difficulties, the changes made, the hopes and the disappointments demand a separate chapter.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
