<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-4-39" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>39 A Spiritual Dilemma</h3>
			<p>As soon as the news reached South Africa that I along with other Indians had offered my services in the war, I received two cables. One of these was from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Polak who questioned the consistency of my action with my profession of <i>ahimsa</i>.</p>
			<p>I had to a certain extent anticipated this objection, for I had discussed the question in my <i>Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule</i>, and used to discuss it day in and day out with friends in South Africa. All of us recognized the immorality of war. If I was not prepared to prosecute my assailant, much less should I be willing to participate in a war, especially when I knew nothing of the justice or otherwise of the cause of the combatants. Friends of course knew that I had previously served in the Boer War, but they assumed that my views had since undergone a change.</p>
			<p>As a matter of fact the very same line of argument that persuaded me to take part in the Boer War had weighed with me on this occasion. It was quite clear to me that participation in war could never be consistent with <i>ahimsa</i>. But it is not always given to one to be equally clear about one’s duty. A votary of truth is often obliged to grope in the dark.</p>
			<p><i>Ahimsa</i> is a comprehensive principle. We are helpless mortals caught in the conflagration of <i>himsa</i>. The saying that life lives on life has a deep meaning in it. Man cannot for a moment live without consciously or unconsciously committing outward <i>himsa</i>. The very fact of his living⁠—eating, drinking and moving about⁠—necessarily involves some <i>himsa</i>, destruction of life, be it ever so minute. A votary of <i>ahimsa</i> therefore remains true to his faith if the spring of all his actions is compassion, if he shuns to the best of his ability the destruction of the tiniest creature, tries to save it, and thus incessantly strives to be free from the deadly coil of <i>himsa</i>. He will be constantly growing in self-restraint and compassion, but he can never become entirely free from outward <i>himsa</i>.</p>
			<p>Then again, because underlying <i>ahimsa</i> is the unity of all life, the error of one cannot but affect all, and hence man cannot be wholly free from <i>himsa</i>. So long as he continues to be a social being, he cannot but participate in the <i>himsa</i> that the very existence of society involves. When two nations are fighting, the duty of a votary of <i>ahimsa</i> is to stop the war. He who is not equal to that duty, he who has no power of resisting war, he who is not qualified to resist war, may take part in war, and yet whole-heartedly try to free himself, his nation and the world from war.</p>
			<p>I had hoped to improve my status and that of my people through the British Empire. Whilst in England I was enjoying the protection of the British Fleet, and taking shelter as I did under its armed might, I was directly participating in its potential violence. Therefore, if I desired to retain my connection with the Empire and to live under its banner, one of three courses was open to me: I could declare open resistance to the war and, in accordance with the law of Satyagraha, boycott the Empire until it changed its military policy; or I could seek imprisonment by civil disobedience of such of its laws as were fit to be disobeyed; or I could participate in the war on the side of the Empire and thereby acquire the capacity and fitness for resisting the violence of war. I lacked this capacity and fitness, so I thought there was nothing for it but to serve in the war.</p>
			<p>I make no distinction, from the point of view of <i>ahimsa</i>, between combatants and non-combatants. He who volunteers to serve a band of dacoits, by working as their carrier, or their watchman while they are about their business, or their nurse when they are wounded, is as much guilty of dacoity as the dacoits themselves. In the same way those who confine themselves to attending to the wounded in battle cannot be absolved from the guilt of war.</p>
			<p>I had argued the whole thing out to myself in this manner, before I received Polak’s cable, and soon after its receipt, I discussed these views with several friends and concluded that it was my duty to offer to serve in the war. Even today I see no flaw in that line of argument, nor am I sorry for my action, holding, as I then did, views favourable to the British connection.</p>
			<p>I know that even then I could not carry conviction with all my friends about the correctness of my position. The question is subtle. It admits of differences of opinion, and therefore I have submitted my argument as clearly as possible to those who believe in <i>ahimsa</i> and who are making serious efforts to practise it in every walk of life. A devotee of Truth may not do anything in deference to convention. He must always hold himself open to correction, and whenever he discovers himself to be wrong he must confess it at all cost and atone for it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
