<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Farewell</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="conclusion" epub:type="conclusion">
			<h2>Farewell</h2>
			<p>The time has now come to bring these chapters to a close.</p>
			<p>My life from this point onward has been so public that there is hardly anything about it that people do not know. Moreover, since 1921 I have worked in such close association with the Congress leaders that I can hardly describe any episode in my life since then without referring to my relations with them. For though Shraddhanandji, the Deshabandhu, Hakim Saheb and Lalalji are no more with us today, we have the good luck to have a host of other veteran Congress leaders still living and working in our midst. The history of the Congress, since the great changes in it that I have described above, is still in the making. And my principal experiments during the past seven years have all been made through the Congress. A reference to my relations with the leaders would therefore be unavoidable, if I set about describing my experiments further. And this I may not do, at any rate for the present, if only from a sense of propriety. Lastly, my conclusions from my current experiments can hardly as yet be regarded as decisive. It therefore seems to me to be my plain duty to close this narrative here. In fact my pen instinctively refuses to proceed further.</p>
			<p>It is not without a wrench that I have to take leave of the reader. I set high value on my experiments. I do not know whether I have been able to do justice to them. I can only say that I have spared no pains to give a faithful narrative. To describe truth, as it has appeared to me, and in the exact manner in which I have arrived at it, has been my ceaseless effort. The exercise has given me ineffable mental peace, because it has been my fond hope that it might bring faith in Truth and <i>Ahimsa</i> to waverers.</p>
			<p>My uniform experience has convinced me that there is no other God than Truth. And if every page of these chapters does not proclaim to the reader that the only means for the realization of Truth is <i>Ahimsa</i>, I shall deem all my labour in writing these chapters to have been in vain. And, even though my efforts in this behalf may prove fruitless, let the readers know that the vehicle, not the great principle, is at fault. After all, however sincere my strivings after <i>Ahimsa</i> may have been, they have still been imperfect and inadequate. The little fleeting glimpses, therefore, that I have been able to have of Truth can hardly convey an idea of the indescribable lustre of Truth, a million times more intense than that of the sun we daily see with our eyes. In fact what I have caught is only the faintest glimmer of that mighty effulgence. But this much I can say with assurance, as a result of all my experiments, that a perfect vision of Truth can only follow a complete realization of <i>Ahimsa</i>.</p>
			<p>To see the universal and all-pervading Spirit of Truth face to face one must be able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. And a man who aspires after that cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. That is why my devotion to Truth has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who say that religion has nothing to do with politics do not know what religion means.</p>
			<p>Identification with everything that lives is impossible without self-purification; without self-purification the observance of the law of <i>Ahimsa</i> must remain an empty dream; God can never be realized by one who is not pure of heart. Self-purification therefore must mean purification in all the walks of life. And purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to the purification of one’s surroundings.</p>
			<p>But the path of self-purification is hard and steep. To attain to perfect purity one has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion. I know that I have not in me as yet that triple purity, in spite of constant ceaseless striving for it. That is why the world’s praise fails to move me, indeed it very often stings me. To conquer the subtle passions seems to me to be harder far than the physical conquest of the world by the force of arms. Ever since my return to India I have had experiences of the dormant passions lying hidden within me. The knowledge of them has made me feel humiliated though not defeated. The experiences and experiments have sustained me and given me great joy. But I know that I have still before me a difficult path to traverse. I must reduce myself to zero. So long as a man does not of his own free will put himself last among his fellow creatures, there is no salvation for him. <i>Ahimsa</i> is the farthest limit of humility.</p>
			<p>In bidding farewell to the reader, for the time being at any rate, I ask him to join with me in prayer to the God of Truth that He may grant me the boon of <i>Ahitnsa</i> in mind, word and deed.</p>
			<div>
				<p id="P14-1">Literally freedom from birth and death. The nearest English equivalent is ‘salvation’.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P20-1">Literally a period of four months. A vow of fasting and semi-fasting during the four months of the rains. The period is a sort of long Lent.</p>
				<p id="P20-2">A sort of fast in which the daily quantity of food is increased or diminished according as the moon waxes or wanes.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P26-1"><i>Saptapadi</i> are seven steps a Hindu bride and bridegroom walk together, making at the same time promises of mutual fidelity and devotion, after which the marriage becomes irrevocable.</p>
				<p id="P26-2"><i>Kansar</i> is a preparation of wheat which the pair partake of together after the completion of the ceremony.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P39-1"><i>Ahimsa</i> means literally not-hurting, non-violence.</p>
				<p id="P39-2"><i>Brahmacharya</i> means literally conduct that leads one to God. Its technical meaning is self-restraint, particularly mastery over the sexual organ.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P46-1">Eleventh day of the bright and the dark half of a lunar month.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P47-1">Laws of Manu the Hindu law-giver. They have the sanction of religion.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P73-1">One who observes <i>brahmacharya</i>, i.e. complete self-restraint. (See note on p. 17.)</p>
			</div>
			<p id="P79-1">‘<i>Nirbal ke bala Ram</i>’⁠—Refrain of Surdas’ famous hymn, ‘He is the help of the helpless, the strength of the weak.’</p>
			<p id="P83-1">An Indian pulse.</p>
			<p id="P93-1">A knowing one, a seer.</p>
			<p id="P101-1">Throne</p>
			<div>
				<p id="P179-1">The famous word in Hindu philosophy which is nearly untranslatable, but has been frequently translated in English as ‘delusion’, ‘illusion’.</p>
				<p id="P179-2">The prayer prescribed by the Koran.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P200-1">The <i>Bhagavadgita</i>, 2‒59.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P211-1">Duties of the four fundamental divisions of Hindu Society.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P216-1">See <a>Chapter 13</a>, third paragraph.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P216-2">i.e. waiters.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P223-1">Regarding the use of the word ‘volatile’, see note ‘In Justice to Her Memory’, <i>Young India</i>, 30 June 1927.</p>
				<p id="P223-2">Monks.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P224-1">A place in Porbandar State noted locally for its coarse woollen fabrics.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P225-1">Priests.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="P226-1">Gift.</p>
				<p id="P226-2">Worship.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p id="N161-1">A light Indian bedstead.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
